---
layout: post
title: "The computer programs that enable your digital experience"
author: Job Hernandez
---
Without software society as we know it would be drastically different. Have you asked yourself what computer programs enable the type of life you live now?

Without computer programs there would be no internet, there would not be a web, and computers and phones as you know them would not exist.

Computers and phones, and the internet are enabled by core programs called operating systems and compilers. 

With respect to operating systems, If you are using a macbook the operating system is MacOS. If you are using an iphone the operating system is iOS. Operating systems are computer programs that provide an interface between the apps that you use such as Google Chrome, Safari, Facebook app, etc and the hardware. The operating system enables these apps to get all the resources they need such as memory. Chrome and Safari are programs. A program is a sequence of instructions. A program is like a recipe. These instructions get executed by the CPU which is the brain of the computer. Well, the amazing thing about the operating system is that it works in the background. The user does not notice any of the working of the operating system but in the background it enables the apps that you use on your computer and phone to get processed by the brain of the computer and it enables the apps to get all the computer memory they need. Programs get loaded into the memory and then the brain of the computer fetches these instructions. What amazes me is that the computer you have has one CPU or brain with multiple processor units called cores but it has hundreds of apps. As a user you might be browsing the web with Safari  or Google Chrome, you might be listening to your favorite song on spotify and you might be doing other things as well. So, how can multiple programs run when there are more programs than computer brains? The operating system switches the computer brain from one program to another program and it gives the illusion that all the programs are running at the same time. That is, at one given time only one app is utilizing the brain of the computer. What is amazing about this is that the internet infrastructure depends on operating systems. The operating system in your phone or computer has computer programs that enable the communication between computers. You might use Facebook, Google Search. When you interact with these websites you are interacting with a lot of computers; all of these computers contain an operating system and software that enable the internet which in turn  enable the communication between your computer and theirs. What I am trying to say is that there are a lot of things happening in the background that you do not notice but are fundamental to keep the internet going. A lot of things are happening in the background that enable you to use your computer including all the apps you use, access the internet. Without the operating system this would not be possible.

I also mentioned another core program called the compiler. The compiler is also fundamental because without it the operating system cannot be run on the computer. A compiler is a program that takes a program – written in a programming language that can be read by humans – and translates it to the language of the computer which is a series of bits. A bit can either be 1 or 0. So, a program gets translated to a sequence of bits. The hardware of the computer processes bits. So, as you can see without a compiler none of the apps that you use could be run on a computer. So, compilers are fundamental. 

And the most important operating systems and compilers are being developed by programmers who are donating their time and skills in their free time. The core operating system and core compilers are open sourced. Open source is a way of developing software that enables the user to study the source code, modify it, study it, and contribute to the project. In contrast, microsoft does not share the source code. It is closed. So, as you can see the people who maintain the infrastructure that enables society function the way it does is being built by people who are not getting paid. Open source rules.

The point of this essay is to show a glimpse of the computer programs that enable the digital based society. Without operating systems, compilers, and the communication software the internet would not be possible. 

Computer programs and the genius of the programmers who invented all this, and the programmers who maintain this infrastructure have and are really changing the world.

“Programming computers is where logic rules.”
