---
layout: post
title: "How to use Emacs as an email client for protonmail"
author: Job Hernandez
tags: emacs
---

*version 1.1*: 8/21/23, add brief explanation of mu4e and improved clarity

*version 1*: 4/9/23, initial version


### Emacs is amazing
Emacs is amazing. I am finally appreciating the power of emacs which to me is being able to use Emacs as an operating system. One of the things you can use Emacs for is email. I will speak in particular about `protonmail`. For this to work you need `protonmail bridge`.

### How does mu4e work?

Interestingly mu4e does not fetch your mail from gmail or protonmail servers; `mu4e` uses either programs such as `fetchmail`, `offlinemap`, `isync/mbsync`. And it uses `smptmail` to send messages; instead what `mu4e` is manipulate the messages when it programs such as `fetchmail` fetches the messages; moreover, `mu4e` uses `mu` to search for messages. `mu4e` communicates with `mu` - `mu` indexes the messages which is to say it puts them in a special database.. The messages are stored in a given directory; for example, in this article we will store the messages in the directory  `~/.mail` but it also common to store the messages in a directory called `~/Maildir`

### Dependencies 
You will need to install `mu` and `isync`

### .mbsyncrc
First you will need to an `.mbsyncrc` but you need to make: `mkdir ~/.mbsyncrc`.

Paste the following to this file:

```
IMAPAccount protonmail
Host 127.0.0.1
Port 1143
User <your-email>
PassCmd "gpg -q --for-your-eyes-only --no-tty -d ~/.authinfo.gpg | awk 'FNR == 2 {print $8}'"
SSLType STARTTLS
SSLVersions TLSv1.2
CertificateFile ~/.config/protonmail/bridge/cert.pem

IMAPStore remote
Account protonmail

#You can change .mail to something else
MaildirStore local
Path ~/.mail/
Inbox ~/.mail/INBOX/

Channel inbox 
Far :remote:
Near :local:
Patterns * 
Create Both
Expunge Both
SyncState *

Group protonmail
Channel inbox
```

For this to work you will need to make `/protonmail/bridge/` inside `/.config/`; login to  the `protonmail bridge` app and export `cert.pem` and move it inside `/.config` and described.

Next, you need to create an `.authinfo` file -- i.e., `mkdir ~/.authinfo` and paste this:

### Authentication
```
# -*- epa-file-encrypt-to: (<your-email>) -*-
machine 127.0.0.1 port 1143 login USERNAME@protonmail.com password BRIDGE_PASSWORD
machine 127.0.0.1 port 1025 login USERNAME@protonmail.com password BRIDGE_PASSWORD
```

You will need to encrypt this file and to do this you need to do this:

```
$ gpg -c .authinfo
```

 And now delete `.authinfo`; you will now have an `.authinfo.gpg`

### Generate gpg key
To be able to send an email though you will need to generate a gpg key associated with the email in the top of your `.authinfo`. Emacs will try to decrypt the file
before it sends the email. To generate the key do this:

```
gpg --gen-key
gpg --armor --export-secret-keys <your-email> > mykey.asc
```

This is actually what the line `# -*- epa-file-encrypt-to: (<your-email>) -*-` is for on top of your `.authinfo` file.

### Sync
Next, type this in the terminal:

Step 1. Initialize the message store:

```
$ mu init --maildir ~/.mail --my-address=<your-email>
```

Step 2. Index the messages -- i.e., scan the messages in `~/.mail` and store thes messages in a specical database:

```
$ mu index
```

Step 3. Fetch mail:

```
$ mbsync protonmail
```

### Troubleshooting

It is possible that you stop using `mu4e` for a while and when you come back things are not in sync.

First, you need to put your gpg key into the Emacs buffer; you can do this by `M-x epa-insert-keys`; after this you may repeat the fetching step of the above.

If you type `mbsync protonmail` and you are not prompted to put in your password for decryption you may need to kill the gpg process; you can kill the gpg process by typing:

```
$ gpgconf --kill gpg-agent
```

You might also want to kill the mu process in some cases:

```
pkill -2 -u $UID mu
```

After you have killed the `mu` process you can now fetch the mail again.

### mu4e emacs config

Finally, you need to configure your `.emacs` file; copy and paste the following:

```
(add-to-list 'load-path "/usr/share/emacs/site-lisp/mu4e/")
(require 'mu4e)

(setq mu4e-maildir "~/.mail"
mu4e-attachment-dir "~/Downloads")

(setq user-mail-address "<your-email>
user-full-name  <your-name>)

;; Get mail
(setq mu4e-get-mail-command "mbsync protonmail"
mu4e-change-filenames-when-moving t   ; needed for mbsync
mu4e-update-interval 120)             ; update every 2 minutes

;; Send mail
(setq message-send-mail-function 'smtpmail-send-it
smtpmail-auth-credentials "~/.authinfo.gpg"
smtpmail-smtp-server "127.0.0.1"
smtpmail-stream-type 'starttls
smtpmail-smtp-service 1025)

(add-to-list 'gnutls-trustfiles (expand-file-name "~/.config/protonmail/bridge/cert.pem"))
```
### Basics of mu4e
To access your `mu4e` file you can use your package manager to tell you where `mu` is located. When I did this I got the file `/usr/share/emacs/site-lisp/mu4e/`. It could be slightly different on your machine.
Now, mu4e is ready to be used which you can do by:

```
M-x mu4e
```

When you want to reply do this:

```
M-x mu4e-compose-reply
```
And to send the message:
```
C-c C-c to send the email
```

You can get a list of the mu4e commands by typing `M-x mu4e-` and typing enter.

You should look at the `mu4e` documentation [here](https://www.djcbsoftware.nl/code/mu/mu4e/index.html#SEC_Contents).

Also, if you want to setup `mu4e` for gmail check this tutorial [here](https://www.djcbsoftware.nl/code/mu/mu4e/Gmail-configuration.html)

Enjoy -- happy programming
